TITLE PAGE
MICHEAL OKPARA FEDERAL UNIVERSITY OF AGRICULTURE, UMUDIKE, UMUAHIA
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE EDUCATION

TOPIC:
IN HIS THEORY “SEPARATING OFF” ANAXIRNANDER ENDED WITH THE TENET THAT MAN EVOLVES FROM THE SEA CRITICALLY EVALUATE THE ORIGIN OF MAN IN YOUR VILLAGE

CAPTION:
THE ORIGIN OF MAN IN ISIAPKU, NISE IN AWKA SOUTH LOCAL GOVERNMENT AREA, ANAMBRA STATE.

A TERM PAPER IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENT FOR THE COURSE GSS217
(PHILOSOPHY AND LOGIC)

BY
Ukwe Emmanuel Mmaduabuchi
MOUAU/COMPED/20/110074

LECTURER:
REV. FR. PROF. MIKE UKAH


THE ORIGIN OF MAN IN ISIAPKU, NISE.
There was a hunter who doubled as a farmer. He sojourned from Oko town in Aguata, Local Government Area, in Anambra State of Nigeria, with his family, to where we today call Nibo.
The man’s name isn't known because, children were recognized by their mother, in the past. Therefore, Nibo (which means mother does not burden) the mother of the great children is known and her husband is not.
Nibo had three sons Ezeike, Ezeakabo and Ezeogu-ine. In the order of their seniority. The three sons bound together when it was time for them to leave their family home. They would first live in a place called Ozu.
At Ozu, Ezeike and Ezeakabo bound together to oppress Ezeogu-ine. It is hugely suspected that they oppressed their brother to enable their expansion plans. Ezeogu-ine was forced to move towards the South/ West parts of the land. 
There, he founded Nise. Leaving Ezeike and Ezeakabo behind at Ozu. Now Ezeogu-ine got married and his wife gave birth to four sons, Ngodo , Ara, Umuazu and Isiapku the last born, Nise and his family were living happily for many years and Ezeogu-ine named the South/west parts of the land where him and his family resides (Nise) and divided the land into four different parts for this four sons, Ezeogu-ine lived a happy life with his family and him and his family were all pagans worshiping an idol called (Ebe-Owhu) years passed and Ezeogu-ine and his family hosted many different traveler’s and being so good and kind to them some of them wish to live with them and there started expanding in unity and love until one day, One beautiful morning Ezeogu-ine didn’t wake up for sleep, tears of the sad news were on their face’s both his sons, wife and others, as the tradition demand’s there preformed the burial ritual and buried Ezeogu-ine, so after some days Ezeogu-ine Sons decided to go their separate ways and start up a new life but will be in the same Community that their father started (Nise) so they all went to their different land share inherited form their father, years passed and days but no sign of conflict among the brothers, one day a man came to the youngest brother (isiapku) and pleaded with him to help him with a piece of land where him and his family will leave, (isiapku) didn’t refuse but he seeks advice from his brothers which they all agreed and gave out one plot of land to the man (Ezu by name) before everything Ezu told them that he is water and he will not harm anyone from Nise since the four brothers happily accepted him and so they agreed, days passed and the water which they found on the land given to Ezu keeps on expanding massively and they began to detest the water and started looking for a way to chase the water (Ezu) away, which they finally did and (Ezu) was gone leaving a hug mark at the land (big hole).
So, Isiapku and his kindred started discussing about how to establish their land by having market and village square where they will always come together and have village meetings and so on, the discussion lead to massive development of market place called ( Ayanafuigigi)
And village square called (Ekeafor) but something can up Ngodo the first son was not happy because of what he saw so he decided to gang up with Ara and Umuazu to fight Isiapku but at the other hand Ara and Umuazu was not fully in support of Ngodo evil plans  so they tried their best to set clear between Ngodo and Isiapku matters to avoid their gods from destroying them and their kingdom’s, after so many efforts tried by Isiapku kindred in other to stop Ngodo from destroying their farm lands and streams all to no avail till one day Isiapku gave up the village square in other for peace to rain, Ara and Umuazu had what happened so they intervened and a big conflict start among them, which didn’t last only lasted for six days when Ara came up with this idea, all of them sharing the (Ekeafor) village square  which Ngodo the head agreed on. Isiapku have lost their full power over Ekeafor but still maintain it’s order, Ara didn’t have any market place so they usually sell their farm products at NgeneAwka market in Ngodo at Eke market day’s while Ayanafuigigi market only holds on Nkwor market day’s and Umuazu didn’t have because they were small and they love going to Nibo market near them. Years passed and day’s, in Isiapku we have  five different  kindreds namely umuosineme, aguoru, umundo, umuudo and ayannwanne, comprises different families, Ngodo, Ara, Umuazu and Isiapku are divided by little stream which has different name for different locations in Isiapku we have the one we call Oweleana and another one we call taotii where village’s come and fetch water for home use and industrial use. Nise as a big Community have their laws and people from different community entering our community obeys them, Nise Kingship is not hereditary as others community do but it’s rotational form the First son village (Ngodo) to Ara from Ara to Umuazu form Umuazu to Isiapku the last born of Nise. We enjoyed our system of kingship till date and Nise is surrounded by Nibo, Nri, Enugu-Ukwu, Mbaukwu and Agulu towns.

Before the arrival of the colonial masters, the villages were administered by rich community leaders (Ozo-titled men). They were the custodians of the people’s customs and traditions, until colonial masters invaded and began appointing warrant chiefs. Ozo was a group of hard-working and rich community leaders, while warrant-chief was a single arrow person, who was appointed by Europeans to collects taxes and royalties from villagers. Eventually, after independence, the taxation from warrant chiefs ended, and the people had their kings instead of warrant chiefs.
In Nise we have many of the pre-colonial administrative bodies for the villages that are  still effective in developing the community. There are four elements of governance in Nise, whose roles and authorities are interwoven, yet distinguished for the development, unity and security of the community.
1. Igwe And His Cabinet: for general administration and external representation of the kingdom.
2. Nise Town Union Government: for social development in building roads and providing amenities.
3. Igwe-In-Council:  maintains the culture and tradition of Nise kingdom; settles civil disputes (non-criminal) and stands as a bridge between the community, local government and state government in all matters
4. Village Administration: which is headed by village chairmen and their executives form the authority within the village. They establish the village constitutions from the agreement of family elders in the village. There are still few offices in each of the villages for proper administration of the kingdom.
5. Otiekwe: are elderly people who reside in the villages to administer peace and order in the villages. They educate the villagers on proper conduct for progress, enforce the rules and regulations that have been adopted by the family-heads in the village, and give judgement on non-criminal cases that were not resolved by family heads. When an individual is dissatisfied with the judgment of a village otiekwe, he/she appeals to the central Otiekwe, presenting his/her grounds of appeal. If the individual is not satisfied by the judgment from the central Otiekwe, he/she advances to the Igwe-in-council, which is the apex-court in Nise.
6. Youth organization: this is a platform for Nise youths (16-35years) who contribute to the physical development of the villages. They take charge of repairing roads, bridges, culverts, streams, markets and other works requiring skill and labour. They also maintain moral discipline within the village.
7. Women wing: this is a gathering of women in the villages for organizing the education of girls, women welfare and responsibilities within their home and village. Like the Otiekwe institution, the village-women wing reports to Nise-central women wing.

Nise people see human beings in general as sacred beings, who are sent into the world by God to develop the world through collaboration and hard-work. Human beings are like doors through which the spirit of development enters to beautify and enlighten the world. This is why we educate and prepare our people to become those doors for the spirit of development, inventions and breakthroughs. Our people consider human life as precious, and human beings as messengers of God with good news for the world.

Nise is an egalitarian community. Our people were never involved in slave-trade or slavery of any form. The Osu caste system, which was practiced in some of the Igbo communities, had been banned in Nise long before Nigeria’s independence. Presently, there is no segregation among the Nise people based on any caste system.


Religion is one of the pillars upon which Nise Kingdom stands, since it influences how we interact with nature and other human beings. Because of the need for understanding and peaceful interaction, there has been freedom of religion in Nise from the beginning. Majority of our people were pagans, who consulted the deities of Ngene-Udo (Ngodo), Mpuniyi (Ara), Ngene-Nkwo (Umuazu) and Ebe-Owhu (Isiakpu). They remained pagans until the arrival of Christians, who were given large evil-forests to inhabit and establish. The evil forests were avoided as deadly and demon-infested forests, and the bodies of dead evil people were thrown inside it. Through faith, the Christian missionaries survived and inhabited the evil-forests, where the villagers were too scared to enter. The missionaries’ survival and establishments in evil-forests marvelled Nise people to believe there is a superior God, and many were converted. Now, about ninety-percent of Nise people are Christians, yet nobody is allowed to destroy any shrine or people’s place of worship.

Nise people are a very peaceful people, who have not engaged in any crisis with neighbouring communities for about 150 years. Though we are strong, we always prefer dialogue as a means of resolving misunderstandings within ourselves or with any of our neighbouring communities. Nise people do not discriminate, instead we collaborate with everyone, especially our neighbours, and teach our children to do the same.




Traditional education in Nise
Elders in the inner family were mainly responsible for the children’s education. Elders within a family confer amanwuru title on all the male-children in their extended family between four and six years. The amanwuru title was an informal/social primary school, in which children were taught their people’s history, morality and proper reasoning. They were taught to be respectful, sincere and worthy of trust in dealing with people everywhere. This level of education takes a long time and prepares the children for a higher-level of social education, known as ima-mmonwu.
 
The higher level of social education, ima-mmonwu, was mixed with mysticism that introduces children to encountering masquerades. In the higher level of social education for male-children between 12 and 16 years, children were taught to be responsible for their community by working hard to contribute to the development of their community. They were taught a high level of moral discipline to avoid scandals and disgrace to the family and community in general. They were taught to defend one another, and to guard the secrets and integrity of their community wherever they go. Some of the teachings on productivity and hard-work were done by assigning joint-tasks and adventures for the children to learn team-collaboration and responsibility.
 
Then there is also a process of education for the girls known as Akwari for girls within the age of reason. Maidens were taught a high level of moral discipline and modesty to avoid bringing shame to her family. The young girls were trained on proper home-management, loyalty, tolerance and feminine industriousness. Laziness and impatience were discouraged by different systems of shame, while the virtues were commended and rewarded.
 
This process of socio-cultural education is declining due to the jumbled influence of westernization and modernization. Yet, some of its elements are still taught at home, before formal education, in some parts and families of Nise. The present system of formal education seem to have neglected the dimensions of moral and cultural values for a better society upon which our societies are built. Hence, there is an urgently growing need for a harmonious education that binds these young ones to their cultural values, histories, kinsmen and communities.

Nise people are successful farmers, who cultivate yam, cocoyam, plantain, cassava, palm fruits, raffia and other foods and fruits. We processed many of our agricultural produce to get palm-oil for cooking, palm-trunk for planks, the palm-nut sheath for herbal soap (ncha-nkota), oil-residue (oku-obala) for local lantern, kernel-oil for cosmetics and medicine, kernel shells for road-construction, kernel chaffs for local doormats and local fuel for cooking, palm-wine and raffia-wine both for local and commercial use. Apart from land derivatives, many of our people had and still have large herds of livestock, Igbo-cattle, sheep, goats and fowls. Presently, we have sufficient farmland to cultivate what need for sustenance and medium-scale commerce.
 
Apart from these environmental resources, Nise is blessed with abundant Human resources with high level of intelligence, dedication, hard-work and business acumen. We have been successful panya (Spanish) importers and traders for as far back as 1922, specialized in importing contraband goods.

Nise people have different annual festivals for celebrating life, season, hard-work and productivity. They include ede-aro, onwa-asato, onwa-oye, agwu, ifejioku and the newly incorporated Christmas, Easter and New Year. We use these festivals to showcase our cultural dances, productivity, generosity, beautiful maidens for marriage and accommodating values for neighbours. Masquerades from neighbouring towns and villages are invited to perform their crafts and dances in these festivals.
 
These festivals allowed young men to showcase their collaborative productivity, as it was done in the past, but with the influence of postcolonial individualism, these practices are gradually losing effect on the people. The energies that should have concentrated on communal development are made to flee the community in a haste of survival. Some of the youth now lack the value of hard-work and have taken city values of quick money and immorality, which is landing many of them in jail and trouble.
